[JEP-211] - Draft the preview announcement blogpost (#1971)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2018/12/2018-12-14-java11-preview-availability.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "Java 11 Support Preview availability in Jenkins 2.155+"
tags:
- core
- developer
- java11
- community
- platform-sig
author: oleg_nenashev
---

NOTE: This is a joint blogpost prepared by the link:https://github.com/orgs/jenkinsci/teams/java11-support[Java 11 Support Team]

image:/images/logos/formal_java/256.png[Jenkins Java, role=center, float=right]

Jenkins, one of the leading open-source automation servers,

> still supports only Java 8 even though Java 9 and above have been officially released for some time.

Author: rephrased

Over the last year Jenkins contributors have been working towards enabling support for Java 11 in the project (Jenkins JEP-211).
It was a thorny path,
but now, on behalf of the link:/sigs/platform[Jenkins Platform SIG],
we are happy to announce preview availability of Java 11 support in Jenkins weekly releases.

Java 11 preview availability offers Jenkins contributors and early adopters a way
to try out the changes before the general availability release happens early next year.
It should help us to get more exploratory testing and, hopefully,

> resolve the most of the issues before Java 11 is officially supported in Jenkins.

Reviewer: Nit: would remove the in 'the most'

> resolve the most of the issues before Java 11 is officially supported in Jenkins.

Reviewer 2: > resolve most of the issues

In this blog post we will describe how to run with Java 11,
and how to investigate compatibility issues and report them.

=== Background

As you probably remember,

> in June 2018 we had an link:/blog/2018/06/08/jenkins-java10-hackathon/[online hackathon] targeting the Java 10+ support in Jenkins.

Reviewer 3: nit: "targeting Java 10" instead of "targeting the Java 10"

As a part of the hackathon,
we provided the link:/blog/2018/06/17/running-jenkins-with-java10-11/[experimental support of Java 11].
This event was a big success for us,
because we were able to get Jenkins running with Java 10 and Java 11 early access,
including major features like Jenkins Pipeline, Configuration as Code, BlueOcean, etc.

> It gave us confidence that we can provide the Java 11 support in Jenkins without major breaking changes.

Reviewer 3: "Java 11" instead if "the Java 11".

> After the hackathon, link:https://github.com/oleg-nenashev/[Oleg Nenashev] has created

Reviewer 3: "created" instead of "has created"

jep:211[JEP-211: "Java 10+ support in Jenkins"].
After the Java 11 GA release on Sep 25 (and Java 10 End of Life on the same date),
the JEP has been adjusted to target Java 11 only.
link:/sigs/platform[Platform Special Interest Group]
has been also founded to coordinate the Java 11 support work
and other platform support efforts (packaging, operating system support, etc.).
A group of contributors continued working on Java 10+ support,
mostly focusing on upstreaming functional patches and
enabling Java 11 in Jenkins development tools.
See the link:/sigs/platform/#meetings[Platform SIG meeting notes] for detailed status updates.

> // TODO: Add some photos from hackfests

Reviewer 2: Is this something you want to add before publishing? or is it just a "nice to have"?

Author: removed for now

Jenkins 2.148+ runs successfully with the latest OpenJDK 11 releases on various versions of Linux and Windows.

> We have performed a LOT of automated and exploratory tests, Jenkins plugins look to work well with some exceptions (see below).

Reviewer 3: look -> appear.

There is ongoing test automation effort towards the GA releases,

> but we have been already able to run Jenkins core tests and

Reviewer 3: been already -> already been

link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/acceptance-test-harness/[Acceptance Test Harness]

> frameworks to verify there is no major issues with Java 11.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
frameworks to verify there are no major issues with Java 11.
```

We have also deployed a new temporary
link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/tree/master/jep/211#temporary-experimental-update-center-for-java-11[Experimental Update Center for Java 11].
which allows quickly delivering fixes for Java 11 early adopters.

> Jenkins 2.155+ defaults to this update center by default when running with Java 11,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Jenkins 2.155+ uses this update center by default when running with Java 11,
```

and that's why we announce Java 11 support preview availability for this version.

> On Nov 19, 2018 we have presented the current Java 11 support status at the Platform SIG meeting

Reviewer 3: we have presented -> we presented

link:https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1lw4unaFhsQk7a8HzhxhgTK4X2X2ocv_W_VW7aoH2WkM/edit?usp=sharing[slides],
and we agreed that we would like to proceed with the preview availability so that
we can offer something for evaluation to Jenkins users.
By the next meeting on Dec 04, all blockers have been addressed,
and the Platform SIG meeting signed off the Java 11 preview availability.

> On Dec 12 jep:211[] has been accepted after incorporating the feedback.

Reviewer 2: > jep:211[]

is it supposed to be a link?

=== Running Jenkins and Java 11 in Docker

==== Official images

Java 11 support is now provided as a part of the official
link:https://hub.docker.com/r/jenkins/jenkins/[jenkins/jenkins] Docker image.
You can run the Jenkins with Java 11 simply as:

```
docker run -p 8080:8080 -p 50000:50000 jenkins/jenkins:jdk11
```

The following tags are available:

* `jdk11` - Latest weekly release with Java 11 support
* `2.155-jdk11` - Weekly releases packaged with Java 11

The Java 11 image is based on OpenJDK 11,
and it is fully compatible with the official
link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/docker/blob/master/README.md[jenkins/jenkins]
Docker image documentation,
e.g. you can use `plugins.txt` to install plugins, mount volumes and pass extra options via environment variables.

If you use containerized agents via Docker or Kubernetes plugins,
we have also released official Docker images for Jenkins agents:

> link:https://hub.docker.com/r/jenkins/slave/[jenkins/slave],

Reviewer 2: should we make this a list?

Author: done

link:https://hub.docker.com/r/jenkins/jnlp-slave/[jenkins/jnlp-slave],
link:https://hub.docker.com/r/jenkins/slave/[jenkins/ssh-slave]
(sorry for the obsolete names!).

==== Experimental images

//TODO: move the images to the new jenkins4eval approach before the announcement?

> In order to simplify testing, we also provide a

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In order to simplify testing, we also provide
```

** link:http://central.maven.org/maven2/com/sun/xml/bind/jaxb-core/2.3.0.1/jaxb-core-2.3.0.1.jar[jaxb-core-2.3.0.1.jar] (save as jaxb-core.jar)
** link:http://central.maven.org/maven2/com/sun/xml/bind/jaxb-impl/2.3.0.1/jaxb-impl-2.3.0.1.jar[jaxb-impl-2.3.0.1.jar] (save as jaxb-impl.jar)
** https://github.com/javaee/activation/releases/download/JAF-1_2_0/javax.activation.jar[javax.activation v.1.2.0]  (save as javax.activation.jar)
3. Run the following command:

```shell
Run Jenkins with ${JAVA11_HOME}/bin/java \
    -p jaxb-api.jar:javax.activation.jar --add-modules java.xml.bind,java.activation \
    -cp jaxb-core.jar:jaxb-impl.jar \
    -jar jenkins.war --enable-future-java --httpPort=8080 --prefix=/jenkins
```

=== Java 11 compatibility issues

To help users to track down the compatibility issues,
we have created a new link:https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/Known+Java+11+Compatibility+issues[Known Java 11 Compatibility Issues] Wiki page.

One of the major blockers we hit was the release of the plugin:workflow-support[Pipeline: Support Plugin]
with jira:JENKINS-51998[] fixes,

> but we worked it around by deploying an experimental fix to the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
but we worked around it by deploying an experimental fix to the
```

> but we worked it around by deploying an experimental fix to the

Reviewer: "worked it around" looks unnatural to me, "worked around it" would sound better to me.
Maybe a native speaker could chime in? Cc @jeffpearce maybe?

link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/tree/master/jep/211#temporary-experimental-update-center-for-java-11[Experimental Update Center for Java 11].
We also know about some minor incompatibilities in other plugins,
but we do not consider them as blockers.

If you discover any Java 11 incompatibilities, please
link:https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/How+to+report+an+issue[report issues in our bugtracker].
Please set `java11-compatibility` labels for such issues so that they automatically appear on the Wiki page.
For the security issues please use the standard
link:https://jenkins.io/security/#reporting-vulnerabilities[vulnerability reporting process].
Although we will be fixing Java 11 specific issues in public while it is in the preview,
following the security process will help us to investigate impact on Java 8 users.

=== Java 11 support approach

> Once Java 11 support is released, we expect a number regressions in plugins and Jenkins core.

Reviewer: "of" missing

> Once Java 11 support is released, we expect a number regressions in plugins and Jenkins core.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Once Java 11 support is released, we expect reports of regressions in plugins and Jenkins core.
```

One of the concerns are exotic platforms with native libraries, and of course other Java versions.
There is also a risk of 3rd-party library incompatibilities with Java 11.

To mitigate the risks, we have created a
link:https://github.com/orgs/jenkinsci/teams/java11-support[Java 11 Support Team].
This team will be focusing on triaging the incoming issues,

> helping to review pull request and, in some cases, delivering the fixes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
helping to review pull requests and, in some cases, delivering the fixes.
```

We will appreciate contributions!

=== Contributing

We will appreciate any kind of contributions in the Java 11 effort,
including exploratory testing, reporting and fixing issues.

If you want to do the exploratory testing,
we recommend to update one of your test instances to Java 11 and to run your common flows there.
Such testing will be much appreciated,
especially if you use some service integration plugins or exotic platforms.
The issue reporting guidelines are provided above.

If you are a plugin developer/maintainer,
we would appreciate if you could test your plugin with Java 11.
In order to help with that, we have created a Wiki page with
link:https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/Java+11+Developer+Guidelines[Java 11 Developer guidelines].
This page explains how to build and test plugins with Java 11,
and it also lists known issues in development tools.

//TODO: replace by Google Form? Or another mailing list?
//TODO: remove the swag reference?

Whatever you do, please let us know about your experience by sending a message to
the link:https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/jenkins-platform-sig[Platform SIG mailing list].

> Currently we consider sending out some swag to Java 11 contributors,

Reviewer 2: do we have an agreement on this?

Author: removed it
